Server islands (#9255)
withastro/docs: src/content/docs/en/concepts/islands.mdx

---

> title: Island Architecture

Reviewer: Any reason we are moving from Islands Architecture to Island Architecture? I generally feel the former makes more sense since the idea is that you'd generally have many islands in a page, vs. one. Silly, I know, but there's a good amount of blog posts, etc. using the former and it doesn't feel like a good wording break change to make.

Reviewer 2: This might have been a mistake, or unintentional! We should probably revert to the phrase we've always used. We can change it back later if Fred really did intend this change.

In Astro, it’s up to you as the developer to explicitly tell Astro which components on the page need to also run in the browser. Astro will only hydrate exactly what’s needed on the page and leave the rest of your site as static HTML. 

**Client islands are the secret to Astro’s fast-by-default performance story!**

## Server islands

Each server island is a UI component that is rendered to the page independently from the rest, making it easy to combine high performance static HTML and dynamic server-generated components.

Add the [`server:defer` directive](/en/reference/directives-reference/#server-directives) to any component on your page to turn it into its own island:

```astro title="src/pages/index.astro" "server:defer"
---
import Avatar from '../components/Avatar.astro';
---
<Avatar server:defer />
```

> This allows your page's critical content to be rendered immediately as a shell, while deferring your most dynamic UI elements, such as user avatars or product reviews. This also means that a slower island, such as one connected to a legacy backend, won’t delay the rest of the page's personalized content from being available.

Author: Instead of saying "legacy backend", I'd say something about different API endpoints load at different speed and server islands allow them to all load in parallel. I'm afraid that seeing "legacy backend" will make some people think that the feature isn't valuable if you don't have legacy backends.

> This allows your page's critical content to be rendered immediately as a shell, while deferring your most dynamic UI elements, such as user avatars or product reviews. This also means that a slower island, such as one connected to a legacy backend, won’t delay the rest of the page's personalized content from being available.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
This allows your page's critical content to be rendered immediately as a shell, while deferring your most dynamic UI elements, such as user avatars or product reviews. Different API endpoints load at different speeds, and server islands all load individually in parallel. A slower island won’t delay the rest of the page's personalized content from being available.
```

Server islands provide a single caching solution for pages that combine multiple types of content:

- Completely static and never changes.
- Dynamically backed by a database that changes infrequently, but more often than you deploy.
- Personalized content, tailored to individual users.

Astro's server island implementation happens mostly at build time, where component content is swapped out for a small script. When Astro builds your site, it will omit the component and inject a script in its place, with fallback content will be visible for a short amount of time before the dynamic islands are then loaded.

This rendering pattern was built to be portable. It does not depend on any server infrastructure so it will work with any host you have, from a Node.js server in a Docker container, to the serverless provider of your choice.

### Benefits of server islands

> The most obvious benefit of server islands is the ability to render the more highly dynamic parts of your page on the fly. This allows the outer shell and main content to be more aggressively cached, providing faster performance.

Author: ```suggestion
Server islands is the ability to render the more highly dynamic parts of your page on the fly, leaving the outer shell and main content to be more aggressively cached, providing faster performance.
```

Reviewer 2: So the push back I'd give here is that we don't really need to redefine server islands at this point. This section is about the benefits, and it should probably start like the client island section does, which is exactly this "The most obvious benefit".

Instead of removing that, if you had to fill in the blank to finish that (or a similar sentence), what would you say?

In Astro, it’s up to you as the developer to explicitly tell Astro which components on the page need to also run in the browser. Astro will only hydrate exactly what’s needed on the page and leave the rest of your site as static HTML. 

**Client islands are the secret to Astro’s fast-by-default performance story!**

<ReadMore>Read more about [using JavaScript framework components](/en/guides/frameworkj-components/) in your project.</ReadMore>

## Server islands

> Server islands are a way to move expensive or slow server-side code out of the way of the main rendering process, making it easy to combine high performance static HTML and dynamic server-generated components.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Server islands are a way to move expensive or slow server-side code out of the way of the main rendering process, making it easy to combine high-performance static HTML and dynamic server-generated components.
```

Add the [`server:defer` directive](/en/reference/directives-reference/#server-directives) to any Astro component on your page to turn it into its own server island:

```astro title="src/pages/index.astro" "server:defer"
---
import Avatar from '../components/Avatar.astro';
---
<Avatar server:defer />
```

This breaks up your page with smaller areas of server-rendered content that each load in parallel.

> Your page's main content can be rendered immediately with placeholder content, such as a generic avatar, until your island's own content is available. With server islands, having small components of personalized content does not delay the rendering of an otherwise static page.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Your page's main content can be rendered immediately with placeholder content, such as a generic avatar until your island's own content is available. With server islands, having small components of personalized content does not delay the rendering of an otherwise static page.
```

> This rendering pattern was built to be portable. It does not depend on any server infrastructure so it will work with any host, from a Node.js server in a Docker container, to the serverless provider of your choice.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This rendering pattern was built to be portable. It does not depend on any server infrastructure so it will work with any host, from a Node.js server in a Docker container to the serverless provider of your choice.
```

> <h3>Benefits of server islands</h3>

Reviewer: I believe we intentionally want to hide this from the ToC? Pointing it out just in case it was an accident.

Reviewer 2: Yes!
